Title: SLVR: Structured Latent Visual Reasoning via Human-like Reasoning Flows

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2610.10563v1

Published Time: Fri, 09 Oct 2026 00:01:37 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
# SLVR: Structured Latent Visual Reasoning via Human-like Reasoning Flows 

Bo (Albert) Gao 

Carnegie Mellon University 

Bing Xue 

Meta 

Andrea Zanette ∗

Carnegie Mellon University 

## Abstract 

Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) often answer visual reasoning ques-tions by relying on linguistic priors rather than task-relevant visual evidence. Textual chain-of-thought reasoning can partially mitigate this issue by encour-aging models to decompose visual questions into intermediate evidence-seeking steps, but generating these steps autoregressively increases inference cost. Latent reasoning avoids explicit rationale generation, but existing approaches provide limited control over what intermediate states encode, making it difficult to impose separate supervision for planning, grounding, and evidence selection. We propose Structured Latent Visual Reasoning (SLVR), a training framework that bridges explicit chain-of-thought and latent reasoning by organizing multimodal reasoning into typed latent stages for planning, grounding, evidence selection, and reasoning integration. SLVR first trains the model to rely on the image by masking answer-revealing text and contrasting the correct answer with visually plausible distractors. It then organizes reasoning into latent stages for planning, grounding, evidence selection, and integration, supervising each stage with the corresponding signal: plans, boxes, visual evidence, and final rationales. This gives latent reasoning an explicit functional structure while avoiding generated textual chains at inference time. Built on Qwen2.5-VL-7B, SLVR improves consistently across multimodal reasoning benchmarks, with absolute gains of +9.4 on MMVP and +14.2 on BLINK Relation, as well as improvements on V*, MathVista, and ChartQA. These results suggest that structured latent supervision can improve fine-grained visual reasoning without the decoding overhead of textual CoT. Project page is available here. 

## 1 Introduction 

Multimodal large language models (MLLMs), which generate language responses from textual and visual inputs, have become a leading approach to vision-language reasoning. Recent systems such as GPT-4o [24], Gemini [9], Qwen-VL [1], and GLM-V [16] show strong performance across visual question answering and multimodal understanding tasks. However, robust visual reasoning remains difficult [7, 32, 8, 38]: MLLMs can produce fluent but incorrect answers by relying on linguistic priors or shortcut correlations rather than task-relevant visual evidence. This failure is especially pronounced in fine-grained tasks that require localizing relevant regions, extracting precise evidence, and integrating it with the query. A common strategy to improve reasoning is to externalize intermediate steps. Chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning decomposes problems into natural-language reasoning steps [35], and multimodal extensions further represent intermediate reasoning as textual rationales, visual traces, tool calls, or programs [43, 23, 44, 18, 28, 17, 3, 11, 45, 12]. In training-based variants, these intermediate structures may be supervised with annotated rationales, region boxes, program traces, or tool-execution trajectories, encouraging the model to follow an explicit reasoning path rather than predict 

> ∗Corresponding author. Preprint. arXiv:2610.10563v1 [cs.CV] 1 Oct 2026

Prior Latent Reasoning 

> Unstructured latent reasoning
> (generic latent states)
> Generic latent states （unobserved, continuous)
> Z1
> No natural-language CoT Generic latent tokens Weak structure

Explicit CoT 

> Verbalized reasoning Text bottleneck Lossy verbalization Verbose decoding
> Inspect the Bunny
> (explicit text tokens)
> Focus on the ears The ears look pink So answer is Pink
> Discrete text tokens
> Z2
> Z3
> Z4
> (typed latent states) [Plan] [Ground] [Evidence] [Reason]

SLVR (Ours) 

> Structured latent visual reasoning
> Typed latent states Image-grounded Structured reasoning flow

Figure 1: Comparison of CoT, prior latent reasoning, and SLVR. Explicit CoT serializes interme-diate reasoning into natural-language tokens, introducing a representational bottleneck and decoding overhead. Prior latent reasoning operates in continuous space but typically treats intermediate states as unstructured. SLVR instead organizes latent computation into typed state segments with distinct functional roles for planning, grounding, evidence selection, and reasoning integration. the answer directly. However, explicit reasoning introduces two key limitations. First, it imposes a 

representational bottleneck : high-dimensional multimodal representations must be serialized into discrete text, resulting in lossy compression of fine-grained visual information. Second, it incurs substantial computational overhead , as each reasoning step must be generated autoregressively. As a result, explicit CoT can be both inefficient and insufficient for capturing detailed visual relationships. Latent reasoning [14, 42, 10, 39, 5, 47] addresses these issues by performing intermediate computation directly in continuous hidden states. Recent multimodal approaches extend this paradigm through continuous multimodal representations, visual token manipulation, or latent alignment techniques [25, 19, 2, 30, 26, 40, 33, 27, 20, 6, 41, 36]. While these methods improve efficiency and preserve richer representations, they typically treat latent reasoning as unstructured computation , without explicitly modeling different functional stages such as planning, grounding, and evidence selection. In this work, we investigate whether latent multimodal reasoning can benefit from introducing explicit structure and supervision within the latent space . We propose Structured Latent Visual Reasoning (SLVR) , a training framework that organizes latent reasoning into a sequence of functionally distinct stages and supervises each stage with task-specific signals. SLVR consists of two complementary components. First, we introduce Visual Dependency Induction (VDI) , a contrastive training scheme that reduces reliance on textual shortcuts by removing answer-revealing cues and introducing image-grounded distractors. This encourages the model to rely more on visual evidence during reasoning. Second, we structure the model’s internal computation using typed latent state segments , implemented via special delimiter tokens (e.g., <plan>, <box>, <evidence>, <reason>, <answer>). These segments partition the latent space into functional roles corresponding to planning, visual grounding, evidence selection, and reasoning integration. During training, each segment is supervised with task-specific targets, including action plan embeddings, bounding box coordinates, and visual patch features. This design enforces a stage-wise decomposition of reasoning while retaining the efficiency of latent computation. We evaluate SLVR on multiple multimodal reasoning benchmarks, including V*, MMVP, BLINK, MathVista, and ChartQA. SLVR consistently improves performance over strong baselines, with particularly large gains on tasks requiring fine-grained spatial and relational reasoning. Notably, when built on Qwen2.5-VL-7B, SLVR achieves improvements of +9.4 on MMVP and +14.2 on BLINK Relation, while avoiding the decoding overhead associated with textual CoT. Our contributions are summarized as follows: 2• A structured alternative to explicit multimodal CoT. We introduce a latent reasoning framework that organizes multimodal inference into typed continuous states, providing a compact alternative to decoding long natural-language rationales, visual traces, or program-like reasoning steps. • Functionally supervised latent reasoning states. Rather than treating latent reasoning as an undifferentiated hidden bottleneck, we assign distinct roles to different latent states and supervise them with corresponding targets for planning, grounding, evidence selection, and final answer prediction. • A shortcut-resistant visual dependency objective. We propose visual dependency in-duction, a contrastive training scheme that removes answer shortcuts from text and uses image-grounded distractors to force reliance on visual evidence. • Empirical evidence for grounded latent reasoning. Experiments across multiple bench-marks show that our framework improves fine-grained visual grounding and compositional reasoning, while reducing reliance on externally decoded reasoning traces. 

## 2 Related Work 

2.1 Explicit Multimodal Reasoning 

Recent work extends chain-of-thought [35] reasoning to multimodal settings by making intermediate reasoning steps explicit [34]. Early multimodal CoT [43, 23, 44, 18] methods elicit or supervise textual rationales for visual question answering and compositional reasoning, while later methods expand explicit reasoning into richer multimodal traces, such as visual sketchpads, generated visual thoughts, and interleaved vision-text reasoning steps [28, 17, 3, 11, 46, 4]. Another line externalizes visual reasoning through tools or executable programs: methods such as DeepEyes and DeepEyes-v2 [45, 15] actively inspect images with visual tools, while programming-based approaches [12, 13, 31] use code as an interface for cropping, measuring, or analyzing visual content. These approaches improve interpretability and provide strong supervision by exposing how a model decomposes a visual reasoning problem. However, they still depend on externalized intermediate steps, including textual rationales, tool calls, programs, or generated visual traces, which introduce additional decoding overhead and may force early commitment to discrete reasoning paths. In contrast, we study whether multimodal reasoning can be organized in latent space, keeping intermediate computation continuous and internal while still grounding it in task-relevant visual evidence. 

2.2 Latent Multimodal Reasoning 

Latent reasoning methods question whether intermediate reasoning must be fully externalized as discrete natural-language tokens. Prior work explores continuous hidden-state thoughts [14], soft concept tokens [42], pause/thought tokens [10], and self-generated internal rationales [39, 5] as alternatives to explicit CoT. These studies motivate reasoning as continuous internal computation, a direction also summarized in recent latent reasoning surveys [47]. In multimodal settings, this direction is especially appealing because MLLMs already align visual and textual information in a shared latent space. Multimodal Coconut [25] extends continuous-thought reasoning to vision-language models. Latent Visual Reasoning [19] supervises hidden states using query-relevant ROI visual tokens, while Interleaved Vision-Text Latent Reasoning [2] injects selected image tokens into latent reasoning steps. LaCoT [30] instead formulates visual reasoning chains as latent variables learned through amortized inference. Other methods explore complementary forms of continuous visual thoughts, including compact visual tokens [26], latent visual scratchpads [40], generated visual embeddings [33], modality-agnostic latent tokens [27], and test-time latent think-token optimization [20]. Recent surveys further summarize the broader shift from explicit multimodal CoT toward image-grounded intermediate computation [29]. Our work follows this latent multimodal reasoning direction, but addresses a different limitation: how to organize latent reasoning rather than only how to represent it. Prior methods improve latent multimodal computation, but their intermediate latent states are often homogeneous or weakly structured. In contrast, we decompose latent visual reasoning into typed functional states for planning, grounding, evidence selection, reasoning integration, and answer decoding. This gives the model an 3“A table scene contains three cups, one plate with four green apples and two red apples on it, and two watermelons.” 

> Masked multiple choice question answering (MCQA)

Visual Dependency Induction 

> Choices: 432Attention is forced to the relevant area

Final Output：4 

Reasoning Integration 

Latent Reasoning Flow 

Latent Visual Reasoning Stages 

> Action Plan
> ···
> 1. Identify the target objects: green apples. 2. Locate the plate in the table scene. 3. Count only the green apples on the plate. 4. Ignore red apples and other objects.

Visual Grounding 

> Locating Bounding Box Bounding Box Projected image patch Grounding reasoning to image area

Visual Evidence Selection  

> GT bounding-box sampling Visual patches from image token grid Selective Visual Evidence
> There are four green apples on the plate.
> Forming rationales
> Rewritten Caption:
> A table scene contains three cups, one plate with green apples and two red apples on it, and two watermelons.
> I don’t know
> ··· ···
> Question:
> How many green apples are on the plate?

Figure 2: Overview of SLVR. SLVR consists of two stages. First, Visual Dependency Induction 

removes answer-revealing textual shortcuts from the caption and constructs masked multiple-choice question answering (MCQA) examples with plausible distractors, encouraging the model to rely on image evidence. Second, the Latent Reasoning Pipeline organizes multimodal reasoning into typed latent slots for planning, grounding, visual evidence selection, and reasoning integration. Each stage receives task-specific supervision, including CoT embeddings, bounding boxes, sampled image-token patches, and right answer embeddings. explicit inductive bias for task-relevant visual reasoning while preserving the efficiency and flexibility of continuous latent computation. A detailed qualitative comparison is provided in Appendix A.3. 

## 3 Method 

3.1 Overview of SLVR 

We propose Structured Latent Visual Reasoning (SLVR) , a two-stage framework for grounded latent multimodal reasoning, as illustrated in Fig. 2. The first stage, Visual Dependency Induction 

(Sec. 3.3), activates image-grounded reasoning by masking answer-revealing caption cues and introducing plausible image-grounded distractors, forcing the model to resolve the question from visual evidence rather than textual shortcuts and recover the missing fact from the image. The second stage, Structured Latent Visual Reasoning (Sec. 3.4), organizes the model’s hidden states into a typed latent reasoning flow before answer generation, with functional latent stages for planning, grounding, visual evidence selection and reasoning integration. Together, these two stages first establish visual dependency and then structure it in latent space, preserving the compactness of latent reasoning while avoiding homogeneous, unstructured latent tokens. Their effectiveness is evaluated in Sec 4.4. 

3.2 Intuition and Example 

Consider the scenario illustrated in Figure 2: the original caption states that the scene contains “one plate with four green apples and two red apples,” which directly reveals the answer to the question “How many green apples are on the plate?” VDI removes this answer-revealing cue, rewriting the caption as a partial description (e.g., “one plate with green and red apples”). The question remains unchanged, but the answer options are populated with hard, image-grounded distractors. The correct answer is 4, while distractors such as 2 and 3 correspond to other visible quantities in the scene (e.g., 4red apples or cups). Unlike random negatives, these distractors are visually plausible yet incorrect under the query, encouraging the model to rely on visual evidence rather than textual shortcuts. Building on this grounding, SLVR further structures how the model performs reasoning internally. Given the same example, the model processes the input through a sequence of latent stages. In the 

<plan> stage, it encodes a high-level strategy (e.g., counting green apples on the plate). In the <box> 

stage, it predicts a spatial region corresponding to the plate. In the <evidence> stage, it aggregates visual features from image patches within this region that correspond to green apples. Finally, in the <reason> and <answer> stages, the model integrates the extracted evidence to produce the final count. Each stage operates in continuous latent space and is supervised with task-specific targets, enabling structured multi-step reasoning without requiring explicit textual intermediate steps. 

3.3 Visual Dependency Induction Formalization. We first introduce Visual Dependency Induction (VDI), an initial MCQA training stage that converts coarse image-caption alignment into question-conditioned visual dependency. Each raw instance is an image-caption pair (I, c ), where c is broadly aligned with the visual content. We use a caption-rewriting procedure to select an answer-critical visual fact e from c and produce a redacted context c− by removing only e while preserving the remaining grounded description. A query q and ground-truth answer y are then generated from the removed fact e. We construct a candidate set A = {y} ∪ D , where D contains image-grounded distractors derived from other objects, attributes, counts, or relations present within I.For each candidate a ∈ A , the model receives the multimodal prompt tuple (I, c −, q ) as input and generates the candidate text a. We define the compatibility score sθ as the log-likelihood of generating candidate a given the prompt: 

sθ (I, c −, q, a ) = log pθ (a | I, c −, q ). (1) We then train the network using a softmax contrastive objective over these compatibility scores: 

LVDI = − log exp sθ (I, c −, q, y )

P 

> a∈A

exp sθ (I, c −, q, a ) . (2) By explicitly contrasting the correct answer against visually grounded but question-inconsistent alternatives, VDI compels the model to form representations that are strictly dependent on task-relevant visual evidence. This induction establishes the critical grounding foundation required for the subsequent structured latent reasoning stage. 

3.4 Structured Latent Visual Reasoning Latent reasoning flow. With visual dependency established, SLVR organizes the model’s internal computation into a structured latent reasoning trajectory. Rather than compressing a visual chain-of-thought into a monolithic latent vector or an unstructured token sequence, we enforce a human-like cognitive path natively within the latent space. To make this functional structure concrete, we format each training instance by inserting an ordered sequence of typed latent states and transition delimiters prior to the final answer:               

> S= [ ⟨plan _start ⟩Zplan ⟨plan _end ⟩,⟨box _start ⟩Zbox ⟨box _end ⟩,
> ⟨evi _start ⟩Zevi ⟨evi _end ⟩,⟨full _start ⟩Zfull ⟨full _end ⟩,⟨ans ⟩y].(3)

The special delimiter tokens are not merely formatting markers. They define the boundaries and types of latent states, and they are trained with next-token prediction so that the model learns an ordered transition structure: planning → grounding → evidence selection → reasoning integration 

→ answer decoding. In contrast, the latent state tokens themselves are masked from the standard language modeling loss and are supervised through state-specific alignment objectives. 

State roles. The latent states in Eq. 3 serve as internal reasoning states with distinct semantic roles. The planning state Zplan represents what to reason about , such as whether the question requires counting, attribute recognition, spatial comparison, or object presence verification. The grounding state Zbox represents where to look by predicting a target region in normalized bounding-box 5coordinates. The evidence state Zevi represents what visual evidence to use by carrying answer-relevant visual patch information from the grounded region. Finally, the integration state Zfull 

represents how to integrate the reasoning process , serving as a compact latent substitute for the full visual rationale before the model produces the short answer y.This design separates two complementary learning signals: delimiter tokens teach the model the discrete reasoning-state transition, while latent state tokens learn the continuous content of each reasoning state. As a result, SLVR does not rely on a homogeneous block of latent computation, but instead induces a structured latent trajectory with explicit stage boundaries. 

State-Specific Latent Alignment. We optimize the continuous latent states through a unified, state-specific alignment objective. The core intuition is to constrain each latent state to approximate a supervision target that strictly corresponds to its functional role in the reasoning trajectory. For example, the planning state is aligned with the textual embedding of an action plan, the grounding state with spatial bounding-box coordinates, the evidence state with relevant visual patch features, and the integration state with the embedding of the complete visual rationale. Formally, let m denote a latent state type, with 

M = {plan , box , evi , full }.

For each type m, Hm denotes the hidden states at the corresponding latent positions, Pm is a type-specific projection head, and Tm is the supervision target for that type. We define the latent alignment loss as: 

LSLA = X

> m∈M

λmDm (Pm(Hm), T m)= λplan ∥Pplan (Hplan ) − Tplan ∥22 + λbox ∥Pbox (Hbox ) − Tbox ∥22

+ λevi ∥Pevi (Hevi ) − Tevi ∥22 + λfull ∥Pfull (Hfull ) − Tfull ∥22 .

(4) While all terms optimize a standard ℓ2 distance, they operate across distinct representational spaces to enforce functional modularity. The planning latent tokens are aligned with the embedding of the textual action plan, encouraging them to encode what to reason about . The grounding latent tokens are aligned with the normalized bounding box b = ( cx, c y , w, h ), encouraging them to encode 

where to look . Specifically, we allocate three latent tokens for this state: the first predicts the object center (cx, c y ), while the second and third predict the boundary (width w and height h, respectively). The evidence latent tokens are aligned with selected, query-relevant visual patch features from the grounded region, encouraging them to encode which visual evidence to use . Finally, the integration 

latent tokens are aligned with the embedding of the complete visual rationale, encouraging them to synthesize how to logically deduce the final answer. 

Evidence Target Generation. The evidence state Zevi is designed to refine coarse spatial grounding into precise, answer-relevant visual features. However, because a ground-truth bounding box may still encompass background patches, irrelevant object parts, or distractor details, we must construct a refined supervision target for Zevi during training. We achieve this by utilizing the final answer to heuristically select the most relevant visual patches. Let B denote the set of visual patch indices overlapping with the ground-truth box, and let vi ∈ Rd

be the visual feature of patch i. During training, we encode the full answer y into an answer query vector a ∈ Rd. We then compute a dot-product relevance score between each candidate patch and the answer query: 

si = v⊤ 

> i

a, i ∈ B . (5) In practice, we normalize both vectors before scoring, yielding a normalized dot product: 

si =

 vi

∥vi∥2

⊤  a

∥a∥2



, i ∈ B . (6) We select patches whose semantic relevance score si exceeds a predefined threshold τevi to form the evidence supervision target. To prevent empty or overly sparse evidence sets, we enforce a minimum patch count Kmin by falling back to the top-ranked candidates if necessary: 

Pevi =

({ i ∈ B | si ≥ τevi }, if |{ i ∈ B | si ≥ τevi }| ≥ Kmin ,

TopK i∈B (si, K min ), otherwise . (7) 6Table 1: Performance on challenging multimodal perception and reasoning benchmarks. V* 

and BLINK are reported with their fine-grained subsets, while MMVP is reported using the standard overall accuracy. The best result for each metric is highlighted in bold . The green row reports the absolute improvement of SLVR over the Qwen2.5-VL-7B base model. Prior-method results are taken from the corresponding papers.                                                                                                            

> Model V* MMVP BLINK MathVista ChartQA Overall Attribute Spatial Count Jigsaw Relation IQ Qwen2.5-VL-7B 78.5 81.7 73.7 66.7 66.7 52.0 38.8 26.0 63.7 86.2
> Monet †[33] 83.6 83.5 82.9 –––––––
> LVR †[19] 80.6 81.7 79.0 71.8 70.0 52.5 42.3 28.4 ––
> DeepEyes v2 †[15] 81.8 –––––––71.9 88.4
> COVT †[26] 78.5 ––56.7 ––––––
> CodeVision †[12] 83.7 –––––––––
> LaViT †[36] –82.6 –67.3 ––45.5 32.0 ––
> SLVR (Ours) 85.2 85.1 84.3 76.1 72.4 62.3 53.0 34.5 73.4 89.6
> Improvement over Qwen +6.7 +3.4 +10.6 +9.4 +5.7 +10.3 +14.2 +8.5 +9.7 +3.4

Table 2: Ablation studies of SLVR. Left: incremental ablation of the training pipeline on MMVP 

and V* . Right: ablation of latent token budgets, where P, E, and I denote the number of latent tokens for planning, evidence selection, and reasoning integration, respectively.                                                                        

> Incremental Components Latent Token Budget Variant MMVP V* Setting PEIMMVP V* Overall Overall Attr. Spatial Qwen2.5-VL-7B 66.7 78.5 81.7 73.7 Short latent 16 16 16 74.0 83.8
> + Masked Text 71.2 81.9 83.0 80.1 Long grounding 64 64 16 74.8 84.3
> + Latent Plan 73.0 83.0 83.7 81.5 Long integration 64 16 64 74.5 84.1
> + Latent Grounding 74.2 84.0 84.3 82.9 Balanced 32 32 32 75.1 84.5
> + Latent Evidence 75.2 84.6 84.8 83.6 Ours 64 16 16 76.1 85.2 + Latent Integration / SLVR 76.1 85.2 85.1 84.3 Improvement over Qwen –––+9.4 +6.7

Tevi = { vi | i ∈ P evi }. (8) It is crucial to emphasize that this dot-product selection mechanism is strictly a training-time procedure used to formulate the supervision target Tevi . At inference time, the model does not have access to the answer query a. Instead, having been optimized via the alignment loss LSLA , the network autonomously projects the latent state Zevi to implicitly isolate and attend to the correct query-relevant image patches. 

Training Objective. The total training objective combines standard autoregressive supervision, state-specific latent alignment, and answer-transition supervision: 

L = Lce + LSLA + Lans . (9) Here, LSLA is the state-specific latent alignment objective defined in Eq. 4, which supervises the planning, box-grounding, evidence, and full-answer latent states. The answer-side objective is defined as: 

Lans = λopen Lanswer _open + λshort Lshort _answer . (10) 

Lanswer _open teaches the model when to stop internal latent reasoning and transition to the explicit 

<answer> segment, while Lshort _answer supervises the concise final answer produced after this transition. During training, Lce is applied to the discrete transition delimiters and output tokens, while the continuous latent states are optimized through LSLA rather than standard next-token prediction. At inference time, the model operates autonomously without access to any auxiliary targets. Given only the input image and question, the network autoregressively decodes the discrete transition delimiters while internally projecting the corresponding continuous latent states to execute planning, grounding, evidence extraction, and integration. Following this structured internal rollout, the model decodes a concise final answer. Thus, SLVR exploits rich, structured multimodal supervision during training while maintaining a highly efficient, direct-answer interface during deployment. 74 Experiments 

4.1 Experimental Setup Backbone model. We use Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct as the backbone model for SLVR. This backbone has been adopted by several recent open-source multimodal reasoning methods [33, 19], which makes it a natural choice for controlled comparison. To ensure fairness, we keep the backbone architecture and initialization fixed across our experiments. Therefore, performance differences are less likely to arise from different model scales or pretrained visual encoders, and can be more directly attributed to our proposed visual dependency induction and structured latent reasoning training. 

Training data. SLVR is trained with a two-stage data pipeline. For the first stage, we construct a 20K masked-context dataset from COVT [26] visual reasoning data. Each raw instance is an aligned image-text pair (I, c ), where c describes concrete visual facts such as objects, attributes, counts, or relations. We use an off-the-shelf VLM-assisted rewriting procedure to identify an answer-critical visual fact in c, remove only this fact while preserving the remaining grounded context, and generate the corresponding question, answer, and multiple-choice options. The resulting redacted context remains coherent but no longer reveals the answer, forcing the model to recover the missing fact from the image. Distractor options are visually plausible but incorrect under the generated query. This procedure is used only for training-data construction, not at inference time, and does not provide teacher predictions for evaluation examples. We manually verify a subset of the constructed examples and filter cases with ambiguous evidence, incorrect masking, answer leakage, or non-unique answers. More details are provided in Appendix A.4. For the second stage, we train on Visual-CoT [28] to learn structured latent visual reasoning. Visual-CoT provides image-question-answer examples with CoT-style plans, region-level grounding annota-tions, and full reasoning/answer supervision. We use these annotations to supervise the typed latent states for planning , grounding , evidence selection , and reasoning integration , while avoiding the need to decode full visible CoT at inference time. More details about the Visual-CoT data format, latent-state construction, and training targets are provided in Appendix A.5. 

Evaluation benchmarks. We evaluate SLVR on five challenging multimodal perception and reason-ing benchmarks: V* [37], MMVP [32], BLINK [8], MathVista [21], and ChartQA [22]. For V* ,we report the overall score as well as the attribute and spatial subsets. For BLINK [8], we report fine-grained subsets including counting, jigsaw, relation, and IQ-style visual reasoning. For MMVP [32], we report the standard overall accuracy. Together, these benchmarks evaluate fine-grained visual perception, spatial reasoning, visual robustness, and multimodal reasoning beyond language-only shortcuts. 

4.2 Implementation Details 

We initialize SLVR from Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct and train it with a two-stage procedure. All experiments are conducted on 8 NVIDIA A100 GPUs with mixed-precision (bf16) training. During training, we freeze the visual encoder and image processor, and update only the language model parameters. No additional vision encoder or projection module is trained. Images are processed with the default Qwen2.5-VL image processor. We use a learning rate of 1 × 10 −5 for the first-stage masked-text training and 5 × 10 −6 for the second-stage latent reasoning training. The global batch size is set to 64 with gradient accumulation. We train the first stage for 5 epochs and the second stage for 3 epochs. The maximum sequence length is set to 4096. We use AdamW as the optimizer with a cosine learning-rate schedule and a warmup ratio of 0.03. The weight decay is set to 0.0. In the inference stage, we set the number of latent tokens for planning, evidence modeling, and answer integration to 64, 16, and 16, respectively. Grounding uses a fixed 3 tokens as defined in Sec 3.4. For evidence patch selection, we use an evidence threshold of τevi = 0 .5 and keep at least 

Kmin = 5 patches by falling back to the top-ranked candidates when necessary. For the overall training objective, we use fixed empirical weights: 

L = Lce + 0 .1Lplan + 1 .0Lbox + 1 .0Levi + 0 .5Lfull + 2 .0Lanswer _open + 3 .0Lshort _answer . (11) These hyperparameter choices are analyzed in Appendix A.2. 84.3 Main Results 

Table 1 reports the main comparison on five multimodal perception and reasoning benchmarks. Compared with the Qwen2.5-VL-7B base model, SLVR improves consistently across all reported metrics. On V* [37], SLVR improves Overall, Attribute, and Spatial by +6.7, +3.4, and +10.6, respectively. On MMVP [32], SLVR achieves a substantial gain of +9.4, suggesting that visual dependency induction helps reduce reliance on language-prior shortcuts and encourages stronger image-grounded reasoning. SLVR also improves all fine-grained BLINK [8] subsets, with gains of +5.7 on Counting, +10.3 on Jigsaw, +14.2 on Relation, and +8.5 on IQ. The strong improvements on Spatial and Relation-oriented subsets indicate that typed latent grounding and evidence selection are particularly beneficial for fine-grained visual reasoning. Beyond natural-image perception, SLVR further improves MathVista [21] and ChartQA [22] by +9.7 and +3.4, respectively, showing that the learned latent reasoning structure also transfers to broader multimodal reasoning tasks. 

4.4 Ablation Study 

Table 2 presents two ablation analyses. On the left, we progressively add each component on top of Qwen2.5-VL-7B. The first stage already brings clear gains, improving MMVP [32] from 66.7 to 71.2 and V* [37] Overall from 78.5 to 81.9. Adding the typed latent stages further improves performance step by step, with the full SLVR model reaching 76.1 on MMVP [32] and 85.2 on V* [37] Overall. These results show that visual dependency induction and structured latent reasoning are complementary. On the right of Table 2, we study the effect of latent token budgets. We denote the number of latent tokens for planning, evidence selection, and reasoning integration as P , E, and I, respectively. As shown, SLVR performs optimally with an asymmetric token distribution ( P = 64 , E = 16 , I = 16 ). This distribution mirrors the informational density of our supervision targets. The planning stage is supervised by natural language CoT rationales, which have a mean length of 65.11 tokens (median 62). Allocating 64 latent tokens provides a nearly 1:1 representational capacity to align with these complex syntactic structures. In contrast, once the global strategy is formulated, the downstream targets—such as low-dimensional spatial coordinates for grounding and highly localized patch features for evidence—require significantly less capacity. Consequently, these later functional states can be aggressively compressed to 16 tokens without performance degradation, maximizing inference efficiency while ensuring both the structure and allocation of latent states are fully optimized. 

Robustness to misleading textual context. We additionally evaluate grounding robustness under misleading captions. Specifically, we sample non-overlapping COVT [26] examples and use a VLM-assisted rewriting procedure to deliberately replace the answer-critical visual fact in the caption with an incorrect but plausible alternative. As reported in Appendix A.1, SLVR achieves higher misleading-context accuracy and lower caption-following error than Qwen2.5-VL-7B, VDI-only, and LVR [19], suggesting that the proposed structured latent flow better recovers answer-relevant evidence from the image when text and vision conflict. 

## 5 Conclusion and Limitations 

We introduce SLVR , a framework that enables MLLMs to perform structured visual reasoning in the latent space. Our visual dependency induction stage constructs 20K COVT-rewritten masked-text examples to reduce reliance on textual shortcuts, while our structured latent reasoning stage uses Visual-CoT supervision to organize internal reasoning into planning, grounding, evidence selection, and integration. Experiments show that SLVR consistently improves over Qwen2.5-VL-7B on multimodal benchmarks, with strong gains on fine-grained spatial and relational reasoning. Together, these results demonstrate SLVR as a promising direction toward more grounded and reliable multimodal reasoning. We summarize the limitations of our work as follows. First, SLVR relies on a two-stage training pipeline, which increases data construction and training complexity. Second, we have not yet explored adaptive latent-state designs or alternative supervision signals for latent visual reasoning. Third, our experiments are based on Qwen2.5-VL-7B, leaving broader scaling and architecture transfer for future work. 9References 

[1] Shuai Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu, et al. Qwen2.5-vl technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13923 , 2025. [2] Chao Chen, Zhixin Ma, Yongqi Li, Yupeng Hu, Yinwei Wei, Wenjie Li, and Liqiang Nie. Reasoning in the dark: Interleaved vision-text reasoning in latent space. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.12603 , 2025. [3] Xinyan Chen, Renrui Zhang, Dongzhi Jiang, Aojun Zhou, Shilin Yan, Weifeng Lin, and Hongsheng Li. MINT-cot: Enabling interleaved visual tokens in mathematical chain-of-thought reasoning. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems ,2026. [4] Ethan Chern, Zhulin Hu, Steffi Chern, Siqi Kou, Jiadi Su, Yan Ma, Zhijie Deng, and Pengfei Liu. Thinking with generated images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.22525 , 2025. [5] Yunlong Chu, Minglai Shao, Yuhang Liu, Bing Hao, Yumeng Lin, Jialu Wang, and Ruijie Wang. Spot: Span-level pause-of-thought for efficient and interpretable latent reasoning in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.06222 , 2026. [6] Xuanming Cui, Jianpeng Cheng, Hong-You Chen, Satya Narayan Shukla, Abhijeet Awasthi, Xichen Pan, Chaitanya Ahuja, Shlok Kumar Mishra, Taipeng Tian, Qi Guo, Ser-Nam Lim, Aashu Singh, and Xiangjun Fan. Think then embed: Generative context improves multimodal embedding. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2026. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=AKXXMK5YTI .[7] Haiwen Feng, Long Lian, Lisa Dunlap, Jiahao Shu, XuDong Wang, Renhao Wang, Trevor Darrell, Alane Suhr, and Angjoo Kanazawa. Visually prompted benchmarks are surprisingly fragile. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.17875 , 2025. [8] Xingyu Fu, Yushi Hu, Bangzheng Li, Yu Feng, Haoyu Wang, Xudong Lin, Dan Roth, Noah A Smith, Wei-Chiu Ma, and Ranjay Krishna. Blink: Multimodal large language models can see but not perceive. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 148–166. Springer, 2024. [9] Gemini Team. Gemini 1.5: Unlocking multimodal understanding across millions of tokens of context. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.05530 , 2024. [10] Sachin Goyal, Ziwei Ji, Ankit Singh Rawat, Aditya Krishna Menon, Sanjiv Kumar, and Vaishnavh Nagarajan. Think before you speak: Training language models with pause tokens. In 

The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. [11] Jiawei Gu, Yunzhuo Hao, Huichen Will Wang, Linjie Li, Michael Qizhe Shieh, Yejin Choi, Ranjay Krishna, and Yu Cheng. Thinkmorph: Emergent properties in multimodal interleaved chain-of-thought reasoning. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Represen-tations , 2026. [12] Zirun Guo, Minjie Hong, Feng Zhang, Kai Jia, and Tao Jin. Thinking with programming vision: Towards a unified view for thinking with images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.03746 , 2025. [13] Tanmay Gupta and Aniruddha Kembhavi. Visual programming: Compositional visual reasoning without training. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 14953–14962, 2023. [14] Shibo Hao, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, DiJia Su, Xian Li, Zhiting Hu, Jason Weston, and Yuandong Tian. Training large language models to reason in a continuous latent space. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.06769 , 2024. [15] Jack Hong, Chenxiao Zhao, Chenglin Zhu, Weiheng Lu, Guohai Xu, and XingYu. Deepeyesv2: Toward agentic multimodal model. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2026. [16] Wenyi Hong et al. Glm-4.5v and glm-4.1v-thinking: Towards versatile multimodal understand-ing and reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.01006 , 2025. 10 [17] Yushi Hu, Weijia Shi, Xingyu Fu, Dan Roth, Mari Ostendorf, Luke Zettlemoyer, Noah A. Smith, and Ranjay Krishna. Visual sketchpad: Sketching as a visual chain of thought for multimodal language models. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. [18] Zixi Jia, Jiqiang Liu, Hexiao Li, Qinghua Liu, and Hongbin Gao. Dcot: Dual chain-of-thought prompting for large multimodal models. In The 16th Asian Conference on Machine Learning (Conference Track) , 2024. [19] Bangzheng Li, Ximeng Sun, Jiang Liu, Ze Wang, Jialian Wu, Xiaodong Yu, Emad Barsoum, Muhao Chen, and Zicheng Liu. Latent visual reasoning. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2026. [20] Chengzhi Liu, Yuzhe Yang, Yue Fan, Qingyue Wei, Sheng Liu, and Xin Eric Wang. Rea-soning within the mind: Dynamic multimodal interleaving in latent space. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.12623 , 2025. [21] Pan Lu, Hritik Bansal, Tony Xia, Jiacheng Liu, Chunyuan Li, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Hao Cheng, Kai-Wei Chang, Michel Galley, and Jianfeng Gao. Mathvista: Evaluating mathematical reasoning of foundation models in visual contexts. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024. [22] Ahmed Masry, Xuan Long Do, Jia Qing Tan, Shafiq Joty, and Enamul Hoque. Chartqa: A benchmark for question answering about charts with visual and logical reasoning. In Findings of the association for computational linguistics: ACL 2022 , pages 2263–2279, 2022. [23] Chancharik Mitra, Brandon Huang, Trevor Darrell, and Roei Herzig. Compositional chain-of-thought prompting for large multimodal models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 14420–14431, 2024. [24] OpenAI. Hello gpt-4o. https://openai.com/index/hello-gpt-4o/ , 2024. Accessed: 2026-05-03. [25] Tan-Hanh Pham and Chris Ngo. Multimodal chain of continuous thought for latent-space reasoning in vision-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.12587 , 2025. [26] Yiming Qin, Bomin Wei, Jiaxin Ge, Konstantinos Kallidromitis, Stephanie Fu, Trevor Darrell, and Xudong Wang. Chain-of-visual-thought: Teaching vlms to see and think better with continuous visual tokens. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.19418 , 2025. [27] Arijit Ray, Ahmed Abdelkader, Chengzhi Mao, Bryan A Plummer, Kate Saenko, Ranjay Krishna, Leonidas Guibas, and Wen-Sheng Chu. Mull-tokens: Modality-agnostic latent thinking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.10941 , 2025. [28] Hao Shao, Shengju Qian, Han Xiao, Guanglu Song, Zhuofan Zong, Letian Wang, Yu Liu, and Hongsheng Li. Visual cot: Advancing multi-modal language models with a comprehensive dataset and benchmark for chain-of-thought reasoning. In The Thirty-eight Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track , 2024. [29] Zhaochen Su, Peng Xia, Hangyu Guo, Zhenhua Liu, Yan Ma, Xiaoye Qu, Jiaqi Liu, Yanshu Li, Kaide Zeng, Zhengyuan Yang, et al. Thinking with images for multimodal reasoning: Foundations, methods, and future frontiers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.23918 , 2025. [30] Guohao Sun, Hang Hua, Jian Wang, Jiebo Luo, Sohail Dianat, Majid Rabbani, Raghu-veer Rao, and Zhiqiang Tao. Latent chain-of-thought for visual reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.23925 , 2025. [31] Dídac Surís, Sachit Menon, and Carl Vondrick. Vipergpt: Visual inference via python execution for reasoning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision ,pages 11888–11898, 2023. [32] Shengbang Tong, Zhuang Liu, Yuexiang Zhai, Yi Ma, Yann LeCun, and Saining Xie. Eyes wide shut? exploring the visual shortcomings of multimodal llms. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 9568–9578, 2024. 11 [33] Qixun Wang, Yang Shi, Yifei Wang, Yuanxing Zhang, Pengfei Wan, Kun Gai, Xianghua Ying, and Yisen Wang. Monet: Reasoning in latent visual space beyond images and language. In 

CVPR , 2026. [34] Yaoting Wang, Shengqiong Wu, Yuecheng Zhang, Shuicheng Yan, Ziwei Liu, Jiebo Luo, and Hao Fei. Multimodal chain-of-thought reasoning: A comprehensive survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.12605 , 2025. [35] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:24824–24837, 2022. [36] Linquan Wu, Tianxiang Jiang, Yifei Dong, Haoyu Yang, Fengji Zhang, Shichaang Meng, Ai Xuan, Linqi Song, and Jacky Keung. Lavit: Aligning latent visual thoughts for multi-modal reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.10129 , 2026. [37] Penghao Wu and Saining Xie. V?: Guided visual search as a core mechanism in multimodal llms. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,pages 13084–13094, 2024. [38] Xiang Yue, Yuansheng Ni, Kai Zhang, Tianyu Zheng, Ruoqi Liu, Ge Zhang, Samuel Stevens, Dongfu Jiang, Weiming Ren, Yuxuan Sun, et al. Mmmu: A massive multi-discipline multimodal understanding and reasoning benchmark for expert agi. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 9556–9567, 2024. [39] Eric Zelikman, Georges Raif Harik, Yijia Shao, Varuna Jayasiri, Nick Haber, and Noah Good-man. Quiet-STar: Language models can teach themselves to think before speaking. In First Conference on Language Modeling , 2024. [40] Huanyu Zhang, Wenshan Wu, Chengzu Li, Ning Shang, Yan Xia, Yangyu Huang, Yifan Zhang, Li Dong, Zhang Zhang, Liang Wang, Tieniu Tan, and Furu Wei. Latent sketchpad: Sketching visual thoughts to elicit multimodal reasoning in mllms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.24514 ,2025. [41] Yiming Zhang, Qiangyu Yan, Borui Jiang, and Kai Han. Multimodal latent reasoning via hierarchical visual cues injection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.05359 , 2026. [42] Zhen Zhang, Xuehai He, Weixiang Yan, Ao Shen, Chenyang Zhao, and Xin Eric Wang. Soft thinking: Unlocking the reasoning potential of LLMs in continuous concept space. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2026. [43] Zhuosheng Zhang, Aston Zhang, Mu Li, Hai Zhao, George Karypis, and Alex Smola. Mul-timodal chain-of-thought reasoning in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.00923 ,2023. [44] Ge Zheng, Bin Yang, Jiajin Tang, Hong-Yu Zhou, and Sibei Yang. Ddcot: Duty-distinct chain-of-thought prompting for multimodal reasoning in language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:5168–5191, 2023. [45] Ziwei Zheng, Michael Yang, Jack Hong, Chenxiao Zhao, Guohai Xu, Le Yang, Chao Shen, and XingYu. Deepeyes: Incentivizing ”thinking with images” via reinforcement learning. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2026. [46] Qiji Zhou, Ruochen Zhou, Zike Hu, Panzhong Lu, Siyang Gao, and Yue Zhang. Image-of-thought prompting for visual reasoning refinement in multimodal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.13872 , 2024. [47] Rui-Jie Zhu, Tianhao Peng, Tianhao Cheng, Xingwei Qu, Jinfa Huang, Dawei Zhu, Hao Wang, Kaiwen Xue, Xuanliang Zhang, Yong Shan, Tianle Cai, Taylor Kergan, Assel Kembay, Andrew Smith, Chenghua Lin, Binh Nguyen, Yuqi Pan, Yuhong Chou, Zefan Cai, Zhenhe Wu, Yongchi Zhao, Tianyu Liu, Jian Yang, Wangchunshu Zhou, Chujie Zheng, Chongxuan Li, Yuyin Zhou, Zhoujun Li, Zhaoxiang Zhang, Jiaheng Liu, Ge Zhang, Wenhao Huang, and Jason Eshraghian. A survey on latent reasoning, 2025. 12 Table 3: Diagnostic evaluation under misleading captions. We evaluate 300 non-overlapping COVT examples where the answer-critical visual fact in the textual context is deliberately replaced with an incorrect but plausible alternative. The image and question remain unchanged. A grounded model should recover the correct answer from the image rather than follow the misleading caption.                   

> Method Clean Acc. ↑Misleading Acc. ↑Caption-following Err. ↓
> Qwen2.5-VL-7B 72.3 41.7 46.0 VDI-only 78.0 58.3 27.7 LVR [19] 80.7 62.0 23.3 SLVR 84.3 70.7 14.7

## A Technical appendices and supplementary material 

A.1 Diagnostic Evaluation under Misleading Captions 

To further verify whether SLVR relies on visual evidence rather than textual shortcuts, we construct a diagnostic evaluation set with misleading textual contexts. We sample 300 image-text examples from COVT [26] that do not overlap with our training set. For each example, we use an off-the-shelf VLM-assisted rewriting procedure to identify the answer-critical visual fact in the textual context and deliberately replace it with an incorrect but plausible alternative. The image and question are kept unchanged, so the correct answer is still determined by the image rather than the modified caption. For instance, if the image contains four green apples, the misleading context may state that there are two green apples. This creates a controlled conflict between the textual context and the visual evidence. We evaluate four variants: the Qwen2.5-VL-7B base model, the VDI-only model, LVR [19], and the full SLVR model. This comparison tests whether each model can recover the correct answer from the image when the caption provides a plausible but incorrect shortcut. We report two metrics. Misleading accuracy measures the exact-match accuracy under the perturbed textual context. Caption-following error measures the percentage of examples where the model predicts the incorrect answer implied by the misleading caption. A lower caption-following error indicates stronger resistance to textual shortcuts. 

A.2 Hyperparameter Analysis 

Table 4 analyzes two key hyperparameter choices. For evidence selection, setting τevi = 0 keeps nearly all candidate patches and introduces noisy visual evidence, while a high threshold may discard useful patches and more frequently trigger the top-ranked fallback. We use τevi = 0 .5 and Kmin = 5 

in all experiments, which provides the best balance between evidence recall and precision. For auxiliary loss weighting, we weight each objective according to its role in the reasoning pipeline. We down-weight the plan loss since high-level reasoning plans are semantically flexible and should not over-constrain the model. Grounding and patch losses are kept at standard weight because they provide concrete visual supervision. The answer embedding loss is weighted moderately to align latent states with textual answers without dominating the language modeling objective. In contrast, we up-weight the answer-opening and short-answer losses, since they respectively control the transition from latent reasoning to the explicit <answer> segment and the correctness of the final prediction. The lower performance of uniform weighting and removing these tailored weights shows that such role-aware balancing is important for SLVR. 

A.3 Comparison with Latent Multimodal Reasoning Methods 

Table 5 summarizes how SLVR differs from representative latent multimodal reasoning methods. We emphasize that several prior methods introduce meaningful forms of structure, including continuous thought tokens, reconstructed visual tokens, interleaved vision-text states, latent visual embeddings, and visual scratchpads. Our comparison focuses on whether a method explicitly decomposes latent reasoning into the same functional stages used by SLVR: planning, grounding, evidence selection, and reasoning integration. 13 Table 4: Hyperparameter analysis of SLVR. Left: sensitivity to the evidence threshold τevi for patch selection. When τevi = 0 , the selection degenerates to using nearly all candidate patches, introducing noisy visual evidence. If fewer than Kmin patches satisfy the threshold, we fall back to the top-ranked candidates. Right: ablation on auxiliary loss weighting strategies. All variants are evaluated on MMVP and V* Overall .

Evidence Threshold τevi Auxiliary Loss Weighting Threshold MMVP V* Overall Weight Setting MMVP V* Overall 

0.0 73.6 83.9 Uniform weights 74.8 84.3 0.3 75.0 84.4 w/o up-weighted answer 75.2 84.6 0.5 76.1 85.2 w/o down-weighted plan loss 75.0 84.5 0.7 75.4 84.6 Ours 76.1 85.2 

Table 5: High-level comparison with representative latent multimodal reasoning methods. 

Abbreviations: Latent Sup. = continuous latent states with explicit latent supervision; Visual Feat. = explicit use, selection, injection, or reconstruction of visual features during latent reasoning; 

Grounding Sup. = explicit region-level grounding supervision, such as boxes or ROI targets; Typed 

= typed plan/grounding/evidence/integration stages; Ans. Evi. Sup. = answer-specific evidence supervision. The columns distinguish design choices rather than overall capability.                                                   

> Method Latent Sup. Visual Feat. Grounding Sup. Typed Ans. Evi. Sup.
> Multimodal Coconut [25] ✓––––LVR [19] ✓✓✓–✓
> IVT-LR [2] ✓✓–––LaCoT [30] ✓✓–––COVT [26] ✓✓✓–✓
> Latent Sketchpad [40] ✓✓–––MoNet [33] ✓✓–––LaViT [36] ✓✓–––SLVR (Ours) ✓✓✓✓✓

A.4 Details of Visual Dependency Induction 

This appendix shows the data format used in the Visual Dependency Induction stage. The purpose of this stage is to create image-conditioned multiple-choice examples where the rewritten text remains aligned with the image but does not directly contain the answer. This forces the model to recover the missing visual fact from the image rather than relying on textual shortcuts or answer priors. 

Visual Dependency Induction data format. Each training instance in the Visual Dependency Induction stage is organized as an image-conditioned multiple-choice example. As shown in Figure 3, each example contains an image, an original caption, a masked target, a rewritten caption, a question, a set of answer options, and the correct answer. The original caption provides a complete image-grounded description and may explicitly mention the target visual fact. The masked target specifies the visual evidence to be removed from the text. The rewritten caption preserves the remaining image-caption context but removes this target fact, so that the answer is no longer available from text alone. The question is then written to query the removed target fact, and the options contain one correct answer together with visually plausible distractors. Therefore, during training, the model must condition on both the rewritten caption and the image to recover the correct answer. 

Example. Figure 3 shows one Visual Dependency Induction training instance. The original caption explicitly mentions the target object, “a yellow umbrella.” The rewritten caption removes this target while preserving the other scene information, including the blue construction wall, white signs, pedestrian signal, shopping cart, and people on the sidewalk. The resulting question asks the model to identify the object visible at the far right above the man in dark blue clothing. Since the rewritten caption no longer contains the target object, the answer can only be recovered by looking at the image. 14 Original caption: A bright blue construction wall fills the background, with two white rectangular signs attached to it, a gray pedestrian signal mounted above, an orange metal shopping cart piled with clothes, and three people on the sidewalk. The woman in a green-and-black outfit is to the left of the cart, the bearded man in a light shirt stands next to the cart, and the man in dark blue clothing is to the right near a yellow umbrella. The poles are vertical metal cylinders, the signs are flat rectangles, and the cart has a wire-grid structure. There are exactly three people, one shopping cart, one pedestrian signal, and two white signs clearly visible.     

> Masked target: a yellow umbrella
> Rewritten caption: A bright blue construction wall fills the background, with two white rectangular signs attached to it, a gray pedestrian signal mounted above, an orange metal shopping cart piled with clothes, and three people on the sidewalk. The woman in a green-and-black outfit is to the left of the cart, the bearded man in a light shirt stands next to the cart, and the man in dark blue clothing is to the right. The poles are vertical metal cylinders, the signs are flat rectangles, and the cart has a wire-grid structure. There are exactly three people, one shopping cart, one pedestrian signal, and two white signs clearly visible.
> Question: What object is visible at the far right above the man in dark blue clothing?
> Options:
> 1.a yellow umbrella 2.a cart 3.a streetlight 4.I don't know
> Answer: a yellow umbrella

Figure 3: Example training instance for Visual Dependency Induction. Each instance contains an original caption, a masked target, a rewritten caption, a question, answer options, and the correct answer. The target visual fact, a yellow umbrella , is removed from the rewritten caption while the remaining image-caption context is preserved. The model must ground the question in the image to recover the missing fact. 

Instance fields. The example in Figure 3 contains the following fields. 

Original caption. A bright blue construction wall fills the background, with two white rectangular signs attached to it, a gray pedestrian signal mounted above, an orange metal shopping cart piled with clothes, and three people on the sidewalk. The woman in a green-and-black outfit is to the left of the cart, the bearded man in a light shirt stands next to the cart, and the man in dark blue clothing is to the right near a yellow umbrella. The poles are vertical metal cylinders, the signs are flat rectangles, and the cart has a wire-grid structure. There are exactly three people, one shopping cart, one pedestrian signal, and two white signs clearly visible. 

Masked target. A yellow umbrella. 

Rewritten caption. A bright blue construction wall fills the background, with two white rectangular signs attached to it, a gray pedestrian signal mounted above, an orange metal shopping cart piled with clothes, and three people on the sidewalk. The woman in a green-and-black outfit is to the left of the cart, the bearded man in a light shirt stands next to the cart, and the man in dark blue clothing is to the right. The poles are vertical metal cylinders, the signs are flat rectangles, and the cart has a wire-grid structure. There are exactly three people, one shopping cart, one pedestrian signal, and two white signs clearly visible. 

Question. What object is visible at the far right above the man in dark blue clothing? 

Options. 

1. A yellow umbrella. 2. A cart. 3. A streetlight. 4. I don’t know. 

Answer. A yellow umbrella. 

Data construction pipeline. We construct the Visual Dependency Induction data with a teacher-model-assisted generation and filtering pipeline. The teacher model is stronger than the student model used for training, and is used only to generate supervision data. Given an image-caption pair, the 15 teacher model first identifies a concrete visual target fact that is directly observable in the image and is also mentioned in the caption. The target fact is selected from common visually grounded categories, including object presence, color, counting, spatial relations, and physical or structural attributes. We require the target fact to be visually verifiable, unambiguous, and difficult to infer from the remaining text alone. After selecting the target fact, the teacher model rewrites the caption by removing only the target information while preserving the remaining image-caption context. The rewritten caption is required to remain fluent and aligned with the image, but it must not reveal the answer through synonyms, paraphrases, indirect descriptions, or commonsense shortcuts. The teacher model then generates a multiple-choice question that queries the removed visual fact. Each question contains one correct answer, visually plausible hard distractors, and an “I don’t know” option. The distractors are chosen to be plausible under the same image context but incorrect with respect to the queried visual evidence, so that the model cannot answer reliably from the rewritten caption alone. 

Automatic verification. To reduce caption leakage and ambiguous supervision, we use a second VLM/LLM-based verifier to review the generated samples. The verifier checks whether: (1) the rewritten caption removes the target fact; (2) the rewritten caption does not leak the answer through synonyms or indirect clues; (3) the question is answerable from the image; (4) the correct answer is unique among the options; (5) the distractors are plausible but visually incorrect; and (6) the answer cannot be inferred from the rewritten caption alone. Samples that fail any of these checks are discarded. In our implementation, we generate the initial VDI candidates with Gemini and use GPT-based verification to filter invalid examples. Starting from 46.5K generated candidates, the verification stage retains approximately 20K high-quality examples. 

Human inspection. In addition to automatic verification, we manually inspect a subset of the generated data to estimate data quality. We review approximately 1K examples sampled from the generated pool, focusing on caption leakage, answer uniqueness, visual ambiguity, and whether the question truly requires image grounding. This inspection confirms that the retained examples generally follow the intended VDI format: the rewritten caption preserves the scene context while removing the answer-critical visual fact, and the correct answer is uniquely recoverable from the image. 

Category balance. We balance the final VDI data across major visual-dependency categories to avoid overfitting to a single type of visual cue. The final data approximately covers object presence, color, counting, spatial relations, and physical or structural attributes. Each category contributes roughly a comparable portion of the training set. This balanced design encourages the model to learn different forms of image-text dependency rather than relying on one dominant shortcut type. 

A.5 Visual-CoT Data Format and Latent Supervision 

We use Visual-CoT for supervised training. Each example is stored as one JSONL row and contains an image-grounded question-answer pair, a grounding bounding box, and textual reasoning annotations. Each data row contains the following fields: • question : the natural-language visual question. • answer : the short answer used as the final explicit answer target. • full_answer : a complete-sentence answer, used as latent answer supervision. • image : the image filename. • width , height : original image size. • bboxs : a list of relevant visual bounding boxes in pixel coordinates, formatted as 

[x0, y 0, x 1, y 1]. We use the first box as the grounding target. • reasoning : symbolic GQA-style reasoning operations, such as select , relate , query ,and attribute filters. • thought : a natural-language chain-of-thought style explanation describing the visual rea-soning process. 16 • dataset and split : metadata indicating the source dataset and split. An example row is: 

> {"question": "Who is wearing a shirt?", "answer": "girl", "full_answer": "The girl is wearing a shirt.", "image": "2331819.jpg", "width": 500, "height": 375, "bboxs": [[214, 0, 433, 374]], "dataset": "gqa", "split": "train", "plan": "1. We are looking for someone who is wearing a shirt in the image.\n2. First, let's identify all the people in the image.\n3. Next, we need to determine who among the people is wearing a shirt.\n4. After identifying the person, we can state the answer based on the observation from the image."
> ,→
> ,→
> ,→
> }

Latent-state construction. Instead of exposing the full reasoning text as ordinary output tokens, we convert different supervision signals into typed latent blocks. The assistant-side training sequence is constructed as: 

<plan_lvr_start> <lvr> K1 <plan_lvr_end> <bbox_lvr_start> <lvr> 3 <bbox_lvr_end> <patch_lvr_start> <lvr> K3 <patch_lvr_end> <full_lvr_start> <lvr> K4 <full_lvr_end> <answer> ashort </answer> .

The four latent blocks correspond to different supervision sources: • Plan latent block. The thought field is tokenized and truncated to at most K1 tokens. These token embeddings are used as latent targets for the plan block. • Bounding-box latent block. The selected bounding box is normalized by image width and height, converted from (x0, y 0, x 1, y 1) to (cx, c y , w, h ), and represented by three latent targets: center coordinate (cx, c y ), width w, and height h.• Patch latent block. The normalized box is mapped to Qwen2.5-VL image patch indices. Candidate patch embeddings inside the box are ranked by cosine similarity to the mean embedding of the full answer. The top patches are used as latent visual targets. • Full-answer latent block. The full_answer field is tokenized and used as latent answer-level supervision. 17